Linux Series part 1: File Management:

Note: If you want to try below commands without any risk, use Docker, so install docker and use below docker commands to run a Linux cotainer and use the shell, e.g. as in tutorial I have shown:
docker run -it ubuntu:16.04 /bin/bash 
But you can use any linux OS , it's your choice. 

Linux uses some conventions for present and parent directories. This can be a little confusing for beginners.
Whenever you are in a terminal in Linux, you will be in what is called the current working directory. Often your command prompt will display either the full working directory, or just the last part of that directory. Your prompt could look like one of the following:

user@host ~/somedir $ 
user@host somedir $
user@host /home/user/somedir $

which says that your current working directory is /home/user/somedir.

In Linux .. represents the parent directory and . represents the current directory.
Therefore, if the current directory is /home/user/somedir, then cd ../somedir will not change the working
directory.
The table below lists some of the most used file management commands

Directory navigation Command and meaning:
pwd - Get the full path of the current working directory
cd -  Navigate to the last directory you were working in.
cd ~ or just cd Navigate to the current user's home directory.
cd .. Go to the parent directory of current directory (mind the space between cd and ..)

Listing files inside a directory Command and meaning: 


ls -l - List the files and directories in the current directory in long (table) format (It is recommended to use -l with ls for better readability).

ls -ld dir-name - List information about the directory dir-name instead of its contents.

ls -a - List all the files including the hidden ones (File names starting with a . are hidden files in Linux).

ls -F - Appends a symbol at the end of a file name to indicate its type (* means executable, / means directory, @ means symbolic link, = means socket, | means named pipe, > means door).

ls -lt - List the files sorted by last modified time with most recently modified files showing at the top (remember -l option provides the long format which has better readability).

ls -lh - List the file sizes in human readable format.
ls -lR - Shows all subdirectories recursively.
tree - Will generate a tree representation of the file system starting from the current directory.



File/directory create, copy and remove Command and meaning:

cp -p source destination - Will copy the file from source to destination. -p stands for preservation. It preserves the original attributes of file while copying like file owner, timestamp, group, permissions etc.

cp -R source_dir destination_dir - Will copy source directory to specified destination recursively.

mv file1 file2 - In Linux there is no rename command as such. Hence mv moves/renames the file1 to file2.

rm -i filename - Asks you before every file removal for confirmation. 

rm -R dir-name - Will remove the directory dir-name recursively.

rm -rf dir-name - Will remove the directory dir recursively, ignoring non-existent files and will never prompt for anything. 

rmdir dir-name - Will remove the directory dir-name, if it's empty. This command can only remove empty directories.
mkdir dir-name - Create a directory dir-name 
mkdir -p dir-name/dir-name - Create a directory hierarchy. Create parent directories as needed, if they don't
exist. You can specify multiple directories.
